The cast reproduces a female head in Roman marble (probably Augustan), which is part of the Palagi Collection of the Archaeological Civic Museum of Bologna. The sculpture, for which the place and circumstances of discovery are unknown, was purchased by the Municipality of Bologna in 1861, along with the rest of the archaeological collection gathered by the neoclassical painter Pelagio Palagi.
The head is tilted and slightly turned to the right; the face appears gentle, framed by wavy hair, relatively short, with a center part, styled with a wide and smooth band encircling the head.
The details of the acquisition of the cast, attributed to Silvio Ferri, are unknown. The original, from the Roman era, is dated to the Augustan age.
Some scholars identify in the Palagi head a replica of the Lemnian Athena, a bronze votive statue by Phidias, offered on the Acropolis of Athens in the 5th century BC by the Athenian cleruchs (colonists) settled in Lemnos. The Lemnian Athena, now lost, is indeed remembered by the writers Pausanias, Lucian, and Aelius Aristides as one of Phidias' finest creations, remarkable in particular for the oval face, with delicate contours, and the beautiful nose. According to Adolf Furtwängler's well-known reconstruction of the original statue, the sculpture would have depicted a graceful goddess leaning on the lance, held in her left hand, supporting the helmet with her right hand, dressed in a tunic and cloak, with the aegis draping softly across one shoulder. However, not all agree with this hypothesis, which is considered lacking in concrete evidence. Furtwängler's hypothesis is based on representations of the goddess carved on gems of uncertain authenticity and on descriptions of Athena statues by Phidias, reported in other ancient sources (Pliny and the rhetorician Aelius Herodianus) that do not explicitly refer to the Lemnian Athena.
Date: 20th century
Measurement: Height 0,44m
Maker: Unknown
Materials and techniques: Calco in gesso
Type of object: Sculpture: Calco, scultura
Location: GiArA - Gipsoteca di Arte Antica e Antiquarium dell’Università di Pisa.
Subject: Testa femminile
Link: https://www.pisauniversitypress.it/scheda-ebook/chiara-tarantino/i-monumenti-ateniesi-9788833397320-576104.html www.gipsoteca.sma.unipi.it http://www.museibologna.it/archeologico/luoghi/47683/id/47840