After the First World War, people suffered from hunger. Especially the increased food prices led to the escalation of a social conflict in Graz on 7 July 1920, which manifested itself in a hunger riot. Since food was hardly affordable, women went to the market places and called out for cheaper prices to feed their families. They especially protested against high prices of cherries, which were in high demand because of the jam tax and the shortage of sugar. Throughout the day more and more people joined the protest whereby the situation got out of hand. 13 people died. Rising food prices and a growing number of people living in the precariat continue to challenge societies around the world.

Riot in the Years of Famine 
The food supply of the families during and after the First World War was especially taken care of by women. Even after the end of the war, the people starved. In the morning of 7 June 1920, the situation got out of control due to too high prices for fruit on the Kaiser-Josef-Markt in Graz. Initially, women claimed for cheaper food, the protests quickly escalated, and were explicitly directed at Jewish shops in the Annenstraße. In the evening, the security forces fired gunshots. Played down in retrospect as “Kirschenrummel

Axl Leskoschek achieved greater recognition as an artist, children’s book illustrator and academy professor in Brazil than in his native Austria. In 1919, the law graduate had turned to art in his home city of Graz, aligning himself with the second generation of Expressionists. Because of his closeness to the Social Democrats and later Communism, he set himself in open opposition to Austrofascism and National Socialism. After the Anschluss in 1938 he fled into exile, finally experiencing his heyday as an artist in Brazil from 1941 to 1948. Following his return, his political convictions meant that he was unable to continue his successful career.

The expressive, clear language of form and the strong contrasts produced by the woodcut technique are immediately eye-catching. Woodcut is considered to be the oldest graphic printing method. With the invention of letterpress printing, this relief printing technique was primarily used in book illustration. The artist Albrecht Dürer took the prints to a new level. Also famous are Japanese coloured woodblock prints, which inspired the Expressionists Munch, Gauguin and the artists of the “Die Brücke” group. During the 20th century in the interwar period, this printing process was associated with the “common people” and so seen as the medium of more “progressive” or left-wing artists, but was ultimately also used as a propaganda medium for various different political directions.

In his scene depicting the “Cherry Rage” riot, Axl Leskoschek shows people from all walks of life standing shoulder to shoulder, defying the law enforcers. A striking element is that we can tell them apart by their headgear. As well as women, he also has former officers, workers and students appearing as participants in the protest. Although it is not absolutely certain that all of these groups were involved, in Leskoschek’s 1955 work they become part of the situation that escalated in June 1920. In addition, he includes the “Cherry Rage 1920” in the list of significant events in his cycle on contemporary history. The protest in Graz was just one of many demonstrations calling for affordable food and goods taking place at that time both in Austria and abroad.

The Cherry Rage - A Riot in Graz
The name Kirschenrummel, meaning “Cherry Rage,” may sound harmless, but it actually refers to a brutal and tragic event that took place in Graz two years after the end of the First World War. Although peace had formally prevailed since 1918, the effects of the war were still being clearly felt in many European regions and cities. Political, economic and social upheavals erupted into a number of conflicts, as was also the case in the newly founded Republic of Austria. The food supply was generally poor, while unemployment and inflation were both running high. In Graz, too, many people – often impoverished – suffered from housing and food shortages and saw profiteering and price gouging in particular as the fundamental problem of their time.
Following the First World War, women were now playing a greater role in politics. Having maintained the “home front” during wartime, from 1919 onwards they were able to exercise their right to vote. They also increasingly banded together in associations and demonstrated for their cause. As pent-up social conflicts from the early post-war period were unleashed, the situation in Graz escalated on 7 June 1920. It began with a protest by mostly middle-class and lower-middle-class women at Kaiser-Josef-Platz, a farmers’ market in the centre of Graz. They called for a reduction in food prices and a stop to profiteering. At the heart of the protest were the higher prices being charged for cherries; the demonstration steadily gained momentum and intensified as market stalls were smashed, before the unrest spread into the city centre and turned into a general anti-government protest. Violence broke out and there was looting, especially of Jewish shops, which were blamed for the price-gouging in an anti-Semitic interpretation. The executive forces present were not able to contain the situation. As evening came, they fired into the crowd, killing 13 people and injuring dozens.
The Graz “Cherry Rage” riot was not an isolated, unique event, but a symptom of its time. Similar hunger and bread riots broke out in many places, including not far from Graz in Leoben and Vienna, and in many European cities, for example in Germany and Italy, too.

The Cherry Rage – The Women
On 7 June 1920, it was a Monday, I went to the market on Kaiser-Franz-Josef-Platz. This time not to shop at the market stalls, but to demonstrate. By then we could hardly afford to buy any food, because everything was getting dearer and dearer all the time. There was profit-mongering and illegal trade everywhere, which was pushing up the prices. Even though the war was over, the food shortages kept getting worse, especially in the cities. I read in the newspaper that in Vienna 91,000 children had already been sent abroad for “recuperation”, for 2,000 the situation was so bad that they were close to being “at the cemetery gates”. There were aid programmes like that for Styria, too. However, finding food was a challenge every day. Although, thank God, my husband had come home safe and sound from the war, the situation was getting desperate. I didn’t know how I was going to keep my children going any more.
One way of dealing with it was to demonstrate loudly for price cuts, and finally put a stop to the profiteering. Even though the harvest was good, the market stalls were making the food more and more expensive – recently cherries were twice the usual price, even. There were many of us there that Monday, mostly women, come to voice our grievances and distress. I saw market stalls being knocked over and more and more people, including many young people and men, joined the protest. Then the mood shifted, and I ran away. In the evening, I heard gunshots in the city.
I found out from the evening papers that the protest had got out of control. Many of the Jewish shops had been looted, they said, and the day ended in a bloodbath. There were several dead, apparently.
The newspaper must have been right – when I got to the market on Tuesday, everything was “empty and desolate” and some women formed a procession to the Food Office. My hope is that the newly founded Commission for Price Regulation of the Graz Markets will prove its worth. The commission includes market traders and growers but also housewives’ organisations from all of the parties. Let’s hope that it bears fruit – and we get some fruit we can afford.
[This woman is not based on a real person. She is representative of the involvement of the women of Graz in the ‘cherry rage’].

The Cherry Rage – The Press
The local press soon dubbed the unrest the “Cherry Rage”, and continued to fuel the conflict. As was common in the period after the First World War, almost all of the newspapers were close to political movements and their news reporting was aligned with their political views. In addition, there were newspapers that were published by political parties, which were known as ‘party papers’.
Their main focus was on how the situation could have escalated in this way. The question of who was responsible for the bloodbath and the dead and injured was also discussed in the press. There was mention of a “horde of jeering rascals and women”. Elsewhere there was a report of “women (...) who were particularly notable for their wild ranting”. In other places there were accounts of young boys, students and former officers on the rampage.
The “Grazer Tagblatt”, a radical national newspaper, saw the government and the Jewish population as being to blame: “Now, however, honest working people see and feel that (...) inflation is growing and oppressing the tattered lives of the majority of the population, while the golden age has come for profiteering and for Jewish business morals: this had to provoke bitterness in wider circles and created the kind of mood that is bound to explode”.
The “Arbeiterwille”, on the other hand, was the newspaper of the Social Democrats. Concerning the “Cherry Rage”, we read: “The terrible uproar about the bloody events of Monday still resonated yesterday among the population of Graz. On serious faces everywhere, one read the question: Did it have to go so far? Was the occasion that led to the violence in anything like reasonable proportion to the sacrifices required?"
One thing is certain: 13 people lost their lives: 12 men and one woman. According to the investigation protocol, a total of 40 people were arrested in the vicinity of the shooting at Murvorplatz, today’s Südtirolerplatz. Of these 40 people, most were workers between the ages of 16 and 24.




The Cherry Rage – A Security Guard 
Rumours of a demonstration getting out of hand on Kaiser-Josef-Platz had already reached us when we were called together at the station house on Monday, 7 June 1920. Apparently, some women were going on the rampage through the farmers’ market because they were upset about the high prices. We went over there aiming to calm the crowd down and bring the situation under control – an easy job that we’d performed satisfactorily in a similar way many times before – but this time we had to back down. The situation escalated, although the protest had even resulted in the prices being lowered.
Suddenly the crowd had grown to several hundred people, the protesting housewives having been joined by youths, men and even children. Their anger was directed against the market vendors who did not want to reduce their prices. Against these masses there were too few of us and we were utterly powerless. Rage against the government, the Food Office, the profiteers and the price gougers, often with the Jewish traders as the targets of popular resentment, came out in more than just the chanting of the crowd. I later heard from colleagues that two of our people had been “spat on, beaten and kicked” at Jakominiplatz. There were reports in the newspaper later on.
In the city centre, the crowd kept dragging people from the trams. So in the late afternoon, traffic was stopped completely. I saw a lot of smashed shop windows and stones kept flying out of the crowd. We had to stand by and do nothing. It was only with the support of constabulary forces and units from the People’s Defence that we had any hope of restoring order. By then, however, the riots had already moved on to the other side of the River Mur. As I heard, there were attacks on Jews and many of the Jewish shops were looted – Jewish merchants generally had a reputation among many people for being guilty of profiteering. 
We had to defend ourselves with our sabres drawn, later on the constabulary and the People’s Defence were able to herd the rioting crowd on Südtirolerplatz (Murvorplatz). Then shots were fired.
[The security guard is not based on a real person. He is representative of the involvement of security guards in the Cherry Rage riot].

The Artist Axl Leskoschek
The “Cherry Rage” riot was an event that the artist Axl Leskoschek viewed and handled from his point of view as a political activist. Born in Graz in November 1889, Leskoschek held social-democratic and later communist convictions that can be traced back to his experiences in the early 20th century: on the one hand, his military service in the First World War, when he almost died from a head injury; and on the other hand, his unbroken resistance to National Socialism, which forced him into exile, first in Switzerland and then in Brazil.
As an artist Leskoschek often chose to use the technique of woodcut, which meant that his work could easily be reproduced and, combined with his preferred style of realism, gave it the mass appeal he sought. During the 20th century the woodcut particularly established itself as a medium of resistance and protest. Clear contours and strong contrasts underline the expressive, haunting imagery.
The “Cherry Rage” riot took place against a backdrop of hardship, hunger and change. It provides an insight into a deeply divided society in Europe, while showing the extreme views that went along with it. This is why Leskoschek explored the “Cherry Rage” as a subject for his “Cycle on Contemporary History” in the 1950s. At that time, Leskoschek once again found himself confronted with political rifts in the context of the Cold War. Rejected as an artist in Austria due to his political views, he personally experienced mistrust and the exclusion of political dissidents.
Axl Leskoschek’s life and work were punctuated by external and internal conflict. This was reflected in the constant confrontation between his own attitude and the political events of the 20th century. As a result, he had to endure imprisonment, escape, life in exile with his Jewish wife Marusya, and his work being disregarded. It was not until 1968, just eight years before his death, that the artist and professor, already highly esteemed in Brazil, finally received recognition in Austria and the first public honours for his life’s work.

Date: 1955
Measurement: 44,5 x 31,5cm
Maker: Axl Leskoschek
Materials and techniques: paper, woodcut
Location: Graz Museum
Subject: conflict, Food shortage, inflation, Consequences of the 1st World War, Social inequality, Anti-semitism, death, riot, uprising. 
Type of object: woodcut
Link: https://360.grazmuseum.at/en/objects/kirschenrummel-1920-gra-05-02241/     https://collection.reinherit-hub.eu/#object=64     https://reinherit-hub.eu/exhibitions/conflicts/ConflictObjects/ConflictObjOne/  