Description: This rare loose-sheet map of Cyprus was issued in 1570, the year the Fourth Ottoman-Venitian War (1570-1573), also known as the “Guerra di Cipro”, had begun. The island’s shape is not based on any serious survey and unlike most maps of Cyprus, the map is not oriented towards the north, but the east. Cyprus is shown surrounded by an armada of warships, mostly Venetian with the exception of the top right corner showing Ottoman ships coming from Asia Minor, where the Ottomans are said to have set sail. The total ships on the map are 19: 18 with sails and 1 without sail.
The map belongs to the Foundation’s Cartographic collection, one of BoCCF’s main Cyprological collections. The Foundation’s main strategic aims are to encourage the research and study of Cypriot civilisation as well as to preserve and disseminate the cultural and natural heritage of Cyprus.

The Map’s historical context - Between 1423 and 1718, the eastern Mediterranean was a region of conflict and the battleground in a total of eight Ottoman-Venetian wars. As a naval and economic power, the Republic of Venice controlled the trade routes in the Adriatic and the Aegean to the Levant, and around 1500 maintained a veritable colonial empire in areas including the Ionian Islands, Crete and Cyprus. By the time of the conquest of Constantinople in 1453, the expanding Ottoman Empire had already consolidated its territorial position in Anatolia and the Balkans, and now became a serious rival to Venice. Gradually the Ottoman Empire challenged the Venetians for their hegemonic position. This rare map of Cyprus was made by the Venetian mapmaker Nicolò Nelli and was published in 1570, the first year of the Fourth Ottoman-Venetian War (1570-1573). This Map of Cyprus in the lower right is signed, “Nicolo Ne 1570.”

Map making - For centuries, maps have been important tools in military logistics as well as critical means for understanding conflicts. The map depicts the island of Cyprus, whose shape is not based on any serious survey, and unlike most maps of Cyprus, it is not oriented towards the north, but the east. In an effort to depict the conflict, Nelli strategically places Ottoman warships coming from the East, and Venetian ships trying to defend their territory.

The Venetians - Looking to expand their sphere of influence and control over the Eastern Mediterranean, the Venetian Republic annexed Cyprus in 1489. Cyprus strategic location near the Levant coast was of much interest to the Mediterranean world. The Venetians highly valued the island's location for trade and exploited the feudal system using the local serfs for costless labor.

The Ottomans  - After years of tension with the Ottoman Empire resulting in frequent raids on the island, during which Cypriots were taken captive and sold into slavery, the Ottomans invaded Cyprus with overwhelming force in 1570. The invasion resulted in much bloodshed and resulted in the islands occupation until 1878.

The Cypriots
Due to its geo-political strategic position and rich agricultural production, Cyprus was reduced to a trading piece for larger empires ultimately greatly suffering the consequences of economic exploitation and violent conflict, the effects of which are still felt today.

Cyprus: The Book of Maps Annotated Catalogue of the Printed Maps of Cyprus Volume 1: 15th-16th Centuries.
The plate has been reworked in areas, leaving a rather uneven impression, with some names printing darker than others, while much of the surrounding decorative detail is untouched. The coastline of Caramania has been strengthened, but not the coastal hachuring. In most instances this could be mistaken for sloppy inking of the plate or plate wear, but in the retouching process the engraver inserted a full stop at the end of the name ‘M.Olimpo.’ (directly above ‘CIPRO’, towards the centre of the island) proving that re-engraving had occurred.
Biography Author - Nicolò Nelli (fl. 1562-1573) was a Venetian engraver, mapmaker, map- and printseller and publisher, who is thought to have been influenced by the engraver Marco Dente [Marco da Ravenna]. He is best known for a series of fine folio-size maps depicting the Ottoman attack on Malta in 1565; but he also engraved a number of smaller maps, presumably first sold separately, that were used in various composite isolarii of the period ca 1570-1575. Several of his maps are signed simply with the monogram ‘NN’ or ‘NNF’ [Nicolò Nelli Formis].
Atlas - The military situation in the Eastern Mediterranean encouraged the production of large numbers of maps to illustrate the islands and possible theatres of war; these were sold both separately and assembled as atlases. The standard collections, with title-pages, were sold by Giovanni Francesco Camocio, the Bertelli family and Simon Pinargenti. While Camocio’s Isole famose ... has a degree of constancy to it, the Bertelli isolario compilations are notoriously unstable, and this map has been recorded in such collections.

Cyprus Map Collection -  Upon its establishment in 1984, the Foundation acquired twenty-four printed maps of Cyprus, bequeathed by the Bank. Today, the Collection counts more than 400 maps and includes most of the known printed maps of Cyprus dated between the 16th and 20th centuries. It is a notable series that provides a detailed picture of the development of Cypriot cartography, the course of which is intertwined with the island’s turbulent history. The Foundation's dedication to the collection, preservation, and public presentation of early maps has earned it global acclaim. Its efforts in promoting scholarly work on historical cartography were recognised in 1990 when it received an award from the prestigious International Map Collectors’ Society (IMCoS). The Foundation's map collection has been enriched by significant donations. In 1988, the late Agnes Michaelides bequeathed the Michaelides Map Collection, a treasure trove of sixty-four items. This collection includes six different tabulae from various editions of Claudius Ptolemy’s Geography, the earliest dating back to 1525, and the first accurate sea-charts of Famagusta harbour, the work of Thomas Graves, published in the second half of the 19th century. In 1993, Laura Georgiades decided to donate to the Cultural Foundation the map collection belonging to her late husband, Antonakis Georgiades, a collector and a founding member of the Cyprus Map Collectors’ Society. The collection comprises eighty-two items and includes a series of miniature maps of Cyprus originally published in pocket edition atlases of the 16th and 17th centuries.
The Map Collection of Mikis and Agnes Michaelides - In 1988, the late Agnes Michaelides donated the Mikis and Agnes Michaelides Map Collection. Among the sixty-four items of the Michaelides Collection are six different "Tabulae" from various editions of Ptolemy's Geography, the earliest dating from 1525, as well as the first accurate sea-charts of Famagusta harbour by Thomas Graves, published in the 2nd half of 19th century. Mikis Michaelides was the chairman of the Cyprus Map Collectors' Society between 1977 and 1981 and his wife Agnes a well-known author.

Date: 1570
Measurement: 19cm x 13,6cm
Maker: Nicolò NELLI
Type of object: Map
Subject: Historical map
Materials and techniques: Loose-sheet map
Location: Bank of Cyprus Cultural Foundation
Validated by: Bank of Cyprus Cultural Foundation - 4 Jun. 2024