Description:
Silk weaving has been present in Cyprus since the Byzantine period. The cultivation of silkworms and the production of silk –sericulture– was mainly an industrial process used to manufacture durable linen and clothing but was also approached in villages as a type of folk art.
It is likely that silk cocoon embroidery was originally a way of utilising cocoons unsuitable for silk production. Using empty silk cocoons cut into shapes, Cypriots decorated velvet, satin or other fabrics with elaborate nature-inspired Compositions. The family remained the centre of production, spinning and weaving of silk, and sericulture was reduced to a form of home craft. The frames decorated with silk cocoons show how natural materials can be used in different processes and approached in new ways.

The Foundation’s main strategic aims are to encourage the research and study of Cypriot civilisation as well as to preserve and disseminate the cultural and natural heritage of Cyprus. Silk cocoon frames are an intrinsic part of Cypriot craftsmanship practices and also speak to the use of natural resources of the island. This artwork is part of the Foundation Ethnographic Collection  and is currently not on display and thus was chosen to be featured in the Travelling and Online exhibitions as a means to offer exposure to our unseen collections.


The Ethnographic Collection:
The Ethnographic Collection became part of the Bank of Cyprus Cultural Foundation in June 2013 when the Cultural Foundation absorbed the whole of the operations of the Cultural Centre of the former Laiki Bank.

The Collection consists of objects of traditional folk art of Cyprus of the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries. The objects are representative of crafts of the pre-industrial period of the urban and rural landscape.

The collection includes objects of metalwork, silversmithing, weaving and woodcarving among others.

Silk weaving in Cyprus - Silk weaving has been present in Cyprus since the Byzantine period. The cultivation of silkworms and the production of silk –sericulture– was mainly an industrial process used to manufacture durable linen and clothing but was also approached in villages as a type of folk art. Since its introduction to Cyprus, it has played an important role in the social and economic life of the island over the centuries. During British rule, after centuries of decline in sericulture, there were efforts to reform the cultivation, production and weaving of Cypriot silk. Despite these efforts, the family remained the centre of production,  spinning and weaving of silk,  and sericulture was reduced to a form of home craft. Since the 1960s there has been a decline in silkworm farming, a practice that has now almost disappeared.


Silk as Resource -  It is likely that silk cocoon embroidery was originally a way of utilising cocoons unsuitable for silk production. Using empty silk cocoons cut into shapes, Cypriots decorated velvet, satin or other fabrics with elaborate nature-inspired compositions. The frames decorated with silk cocoons show how natural materials can be used in different processes and approached in new  ways. These frames were made in many parts of Cyprus mostly by the women who cultivated silkworms themselves.


Process -  The collection has three such framed examples. The special process of creating the frames begins with the cleaning of the cocoons from the outer fibres. Then, without exposing the cocoons to the sun or heating them in the oven, as is done when they are intended for silk thread, they are cut with a blade and the chrysalises are carefully removed. The main design is first drawn on paper and then transferred to velvet with the aid of parchment paper. The cocoons are cut out with scissors, precisely calculating the design so as not to waste this precious material. The pieces that will form the design are assembled with pins on a cushion and beads or sequins are added to enrich the composition.
The pieces are then transferred a few at a time onto velvet pinned on a pallet, and, following the original design, they are fastened with pins and small seams made on the back of the velvet, so that they cannot be seen in the stitching.
The work is then handed to a craftsman, who frames it with protective glass.

Composition - The cocoon frames were a staple decorative element of traditional Cypriot houses in the 20th century. The designs rarely deviated from the standard motifs: daisies and carnations in bouquets, wreaths or branches. The monotony of the material was offset by the variety of compositions and the variation in the size of the flowers. The frames of the cocoon frames, the 'karyetina' as they are called, are sometimes simple and sometimes combined with photographs or postcards.

Family Mementos - Silk cocoon frames are particularly interesting because they are often used to frame family photographs. As a result, these items have a very personal connection with their owners and are passed down through generations. Unfortunately the couple in this artwork has not been identified. The photo was originally added by the family who owned the silk cocoon frame, before the item was added to the BoCCF collections.

Maker: unknown
Date: 20th century
Measurement: 57x60cm
Type of object: Silk cocoon frame
Subject: Cypriot traditional craft
Materials and techniques: Velvet, silk cocoons
Location: Bank of Cyprus Cultural Foundation
Validation: Bank of Cyprus Cultural Foundation - 4 June 2024