The richly decorated Gingerbread Baker’s Chest is a symbol of a rich craft tradition.
The Gingerbread Baker’s were one of many guilds that formed in the Middle Ages, building up communities and organising the crafts.
The rules of the guilds ensured the preservation and passing on of the crafts.
The system of rules became a tradition. Guild chests were an integral element of each guild, as they served to keep important documents.
The trade regulations of 1859 marked the end of the guilds in Austria.
The industrial revolution was accompanied by a change in the craft sector, knowledge of craft skills got lost and the passing on of intangible heritage became increasingly less important.
Nevertheless, traditional crafts are still used today, which raises the question of value and significance anew.

The rich decor of the Gingerbread Bakers’s Chest bears witness to the wealth of the guild members.
The chest was used  for storing important documents such as the Crafts Code, which was established by Ferdinand II in 1597.
The ginger bread bakers worked with and traded in honey. They made  candles of beeswax and enjoyed a special right to brew  mead, which secured them a profitable additional income.

Guild chests were usually secured by several locks. The chest was intended to be opened collectively and only with the keys of chosen representatives, since the contents of the chests were valuable.
The most important documents of each guild as well as the guild treasury were kept inside. The treasury was partly funded by fines for breaches of the rules.
For example, a member had to pay a penalty if he divulged what had been discussed at meetings, which were held in front of an open guild chest.

Crafts played an important role from the Middle Ages on, especially in cities and market towns. Urban politics was dominated by trade and craft affairs.
Many cities in northern, western and central Europe have a rich history of crafts, including Graz. Traces of medieval Graz can still be seen today, especially in the inner city.
Here there was a range of skilled trades that included butchers, bakers, shoemakers, tailors, barbers and barber-surgeons, blacksmiths, millers, master builders, masons, carpenters and glaziers.

The Guild chest
Guild chests were usually very richly decorated and elaborately crafted, and formed the centrepiece and symbol of every craft guild. When members gathered, if the guild was in session the chest was placed on a table and ceremoniously opened to announce that the meeting was about to begin. An open guild chest was a sign that they should behave decently, maintain a respectful silence and observe clear rules. The chests contained the guild privileges, the craft regulations, the master records, journeymen’s books, the admission book, logs and important documents. They also held the guild treasury, which was funded with dues paid by masters and journeymen and also fines for all kinds of breaches of the guild rules. These violations included spilling large amounts of wine, cursing or gambling in front of an open guild chest. Even excused absences from meetings would incur a penalty. The privileges and the craft regulations were read out at every meeting to remind members of their rights and duties.
Apprentices were admitted to the guild in an initiation ceremony, which took place in front of an open chest. They vowed before the chest that they would complete their apprenticeship faithfully and properly, not run away, follow the guild rules and keep the secrets of the guild. The chests often had multiple locks, so that they could only be opened with the keys of several different guild officials. Guild meetings, which were centred around the guild chest, were usually held four times a year.

Crafts and exchange
In medieval Central, Western and Northern Europe, craft trades played an essential role. The prosperity of the towns depended on their revenue. During the High Middle Ages, groups of craftsmen came together to form self-governing associations in a cooperative arrangement – the guilds. Their members included master craftsmen, journeymen and apprentices. These craft associations not only had the authority to ensure that duties, rights and quality were maintained, but also provided social support, for example when members fell into hardship through no fault of their own. They worked to prevent competition and keep order between guild members. Guilds had their own customs, greetings and even a special language.
On completion of the apprenticeship and their ‘absolution’, young craftsmen had to set off on their wanderings as a journeyman. The journeyman would spend three years travelling around, during which time he was not allowed to come within 50 km of his home town. These wanderings introduced him to new working practices, foreign places and regions, as well as new styles used elsewhere. They also brought him the advantages of forging new relationships and learning all kinds of traditional or new techniques from various masters. Journeymen became familiar with other customs and traditions and gained life experience in the process. 
The wanderings of the journeyman (known as the Walz) is a custom that is still practised voluntarily today. In 2014 it was included in UNESCO’s list of intangible cultural heritage.

The Guild Chest of the Gingerbread Bakers
The Lebzelter were known for their honey gingerbread. They were gingerbread bakers, but also mead makers and chandlers. They traded in honey, processed it and produced mead and beeswax candles as well as their popular gingerbread. Some gingerbread makers even had their own tavern licence allowing them to sell honey wine.
The particularly rich ornamentation on the guild chest of the Graz gingerbread bakers points to a certain level of prosperity among the guild members. A sign of the guild is also found on their chest – it is decorated with a beehive inlaid in the wood and a metal emblem. Because of the high commercial value of honey, the craft of the gingerbread bakers was lucrative in the Middle Ages. It was only after sugar began to be extracted from sugar beets that the gingerbread bakers lost their status and their trade was replaced by the sugar bakers.
The tradition of gingerbread making, which merged with the craft of the Austrian confectioners, has been listed as UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage since 20.

Date: 1744
Measurement: height 49 × width 60 x depth 39 cm
Maker: Unknown
Materials and techniques: Inlaid wood
Subject:craftsmanship, crafts, guilds, trade, ginger bread bakers, intangible cultural heritage, craftsman, journeyman, wandering, Walz, Middle Ages, apprenticeship, knowledge sharing, exchange, honey, ginger bread
Type of object: Depository furniture
Location: Graz Museum
Link: https://360.grazmuseum.at/en/objects/innungstruhe-der-grazer-lebzelter/    https://collection.reinherit-hub.eu/#object=184    https://reinherit-hub.eu/exhibitions/craftmanship/CraftmanshipObjects/CraftmanshipObjThree/