Pyxides were clay vessels with a lid and were used for placing and safekeeping women’s jewellery and cosmetics. Most probably, the horses on the lid symbolize the privileged class of knights. This pyxis with four horses on the lid belonged to a man and was considered a luxurious grave offering. The owner of the pyxis was a privileged and wealthy man, who most probably belonged to the class of the aristocrats.

Pyxides were found in female graves as offerings to dead women. However, the big flat pyxides which were decorated with horses on the lid, first appear in the 9th and 8th century B.C. They were found mostly in luxurious male graves. Most probably, the horses on the lid symbolize the privileged class of knights. This pyxis with four horses on the lid belonged to a man and was considered a luxurious grave offering. The owner of the pyxis was a privileged and wealthy man, who most probably belonged to the class of the aristocrats. The horses which decorate the lid were symbols of this class and from this fact we assume that he was a man of high social standing. This man wanted the pyxis to denote his social status, even after his death, as a luxurious funerary object.

The organization of burial rituals was duty and responsibility of the wife along with taking care of the grave. In this framework, women placed the offering on the grave, which also included the pyxis, one of the objects which accompanied the dead husband in the life after death. The role of the wife changes after the death of her husband but her position remains important as mother of the male children of the family which will continue the family tradition.

Women could also own pyxides with horses if they came from an aristocratic gentry, as daughters or wives of aristocrats. Women could not be knights as this was a privilege of men.

The social status of women and men in ancient Greece was different as men and women belonged to different citizen categories. Men could belong to a social class, participate in city gatherings at the Agora, take part in symposia, be part of decision-making and vote.  Women and their property belonged to the family of their father or husband, and they did not have the freedom to make decisions on their own. This pyxis represents the social hierarchy of the time.  It is important to stress that this pyxis would never be owned by poor people or people who were not aristocrats so the pyxis is a sign of social inequality which was of course the norm at that time.

Today, we know ancient Athens not only as an important Greek polis – that is, a city state – but also as the cradle of democracy. Athens established its greatest display of power during the 5th century BCE, when Athenian democracy also achieved its greatest expression. And yet this popular sovereignty had a long and by no means linear development.

From 1100 to 479 BC, internal disputes were frequent, with the aristocrats taking over the power from the kings, who, on their turn, were replaced by the tyrants. Tyrants were men of aristocratic origin who came to power without constitutional right, sometimes aided by non-aristocrats who felt excluded from power.

Over time, the merchants started questioning the power of the aristocrats. They felt excluded from decision making in their own city and social conflicts were manifested as internal disputes between stronger and weaker members of the society. One would say that the middle class, as we know it today, emerged from the merchants and artisans.

The pyxis is one of the objects - symbols of the era manifesting the existence of hierarchical conflicts which shaped the future of these populations. Following tyranny, democracy finally prevailed. 

The creator of the pyxis was a skilled potter who owned an important pottery workshop in Athens. He belonged to the social class of merchants and artisans, deriving wealth from his profession. His name is unknown. The order of this pyxis was placed by an aristocrat to signify his social standing. In later years, potters decorated the vessels and pyxides with scenes from aristocrats’ everyday life and habits based solely on the narrations of aristocrats and their own imagination, since they could not participate in these events. Over time, the merchants started questioning the power of the aristocrats. One would say that the middle class, as we know it today, emerged from the merchants and artisans.

Date: 760-750 BCE
Type of object: Pottery
Measurement: H. 26.5 cm x D. 32,5 cm
Maker: Unknown
Materials and techniques: Clay
Location: Museum of Cycladic Art
Link: https://cycladic.gr/en/exhibit/ng1103-pixida-me-poma