Between gender roles

The (non-)identification with one gender has always heated up tempers and shed light on general socially accepted role models. Ida Maly, who lived an unconventional and emancipated life as an artist, depicted herself as a garçonne, a woman of boyish appearance, in her self-portrait. The breaking with stereotyped roles defined by society and the suspension of typically female and male gender identity were characteristic features of her works. Ida Maly was committed to a psychiatric hospital in 1928. In 1941, she was murdered in the frame of the Nazi euthanasia programme in an extermination centre near Linz.

he effects of the First World War were also felt by artists of the time. The political instability of the Weimar Republic, inflation and unemployment extended throughout the various social classes and caused misery.
Living and surviving as an artist in the 1920s was a challenge. In order to escape financial hardship, you had to be on the constant lookout for potential clients and patrons. A lot of effort went into courting and charming the few people who could commission and pay for a work of art.

Ida Sofia Maly’s work cannot be pinned down to a particular style. She moved between elements of different trends and art movements. As a constant seeker, and due to her precarious living conditions, she often had to adapt her artistic expression in order to find clients. She devoted herself to Expressionism, tried out abstract design, used aspects of Art Nouveau and Art Deco and became familiar with New Objectivity. Her later works show shifted perspectives, fantastical beings with oversized heads and robotic figures.
Her oeuvre encompasses paintings, copies of old masters, drawings and text-image combinations. However, running throughout her work we see a constant observation of the environment, a critique of society, the challenging of male and female gender roles and often autobiographical themes.

The artist Ida Sofia Maly
Ida Sofia Maly was born in Vienna in 1894 and grew up in Graz. Her painting studies, which she started first in Graz, took her back to Vienna and in 1918 to Munich. Since the rigid structures of the Munich Academy contradicted her nature, she took private painting lessons. She earned her living by factory work, copying old art works and smaller artistic commissions. Thanks to her friendship with actresses from her time in Graz, she gained access to circles that she described as "elite" and "aristocracy". In 1921 she gave birth to a daughter, whom she, with a heavy heart, had to entrust to adoptive parents two years later. She did not feel up to her role as a single parent, and she refused to marry the child's father because of her aversion to permanent relationships. She then stayed in Berlin, Paris and Vienna.
In 1928, Maly was increasingly confronted with financial challenges, and on top of that psychological problems arose for the first time. That same year she was admitted to a psychiatric - the diagnosis was schizophrenia. As an artist, she consciously discerned the upheavals of the early 1930s and gave expression to them in her work. At the same time, her artistic style changed towards abstraction. The human being for instance became a robot-like being.
From the mid-1930s, no more works by the artist are knownIt is unclear whether she was not allowed to paint in the psychiatric institution anymore or if the paintings of those years have disappeared. In 1941 as part of the National Socialist “euthanasia” program she was transferred to the Hartheim Castle extermination facility. Less than two weeks later she was dead. She shared her fate with around 30,000 people who were murdered in the castle's killing facilities between 1940 and 1944. After the war, the painter faded into oblivion. It was not until 1996 that Maly's pictures were shown for the first time in a Viennese exhibition.

The Woman of the 1920’s
It was not only art that broke classic female roles in the interwar period. During the First World War, women also did those jobs that had previously only been accomplished by men. This provided them with new self-confidence. In 1919, Austrian women were allowed to vote for the first time. Shortly afterwards, women representatives were elected to the Parliament. Although women were forced out of their jobs again after the war and even ordered back to "housekeeping" by decree, the emancipation process had already begun.

Gender aspects in the work of Ida Sofia Maly
In her self-portrait, the artist Ida Sofia Maly staged herself as a Garçonne – a boyish-looking woman with short hair, a shirt, and a tie. The portrait picks up on the progressive thoughts of Munich's decidedly anti-bourgeois bohèmian society. Equal rights and the emancipation of women played a central role in these artist circles. Maly was embedded in a self-confident environment that questioned classic role models in the 1920s and who tried to overcome them. Popular motifs of the artists were strong female types and women in men's clothing. However, Maly's depictions of male transvestites were unusual. Not only did she join the artistic tenor of the time – she was even a step ahead of her time.

The painter Ida Sofia Maly wrote a poem on the back of her drawing “Victory” in Vienna in May 1927. Today it is part of the Neue Galerie collection at the Universalmuseum Joanneum in Graz.

It reads:
As in a fairytale it began - - -
Once in the lovely summertime
I am seized by profound anguish, 
Deep right into my heart.
The work did indeed bring me bread, 
But then my artist’s heart despaired. 
Two prizes were given to me,
But in my impetuosity
I do not go to great trouble,
And the pictures don’t turn out well. 
So I took my satchel and hat -
And then suddenly all was well. 
Love wanted to capture my heart - 
Yet there came a miracle picture 
Becoming my shield of victory.
Now I want to belong wholly to art.

Date: 1928-1930
Measurement: width 21,2 x height 28,4 cm
Maker: Ida Sofia Maly
Materials and techniques: Watercolour on Paper
Location: Graz Museum
Subject: identity, painter, womens rights, trans gender, 3rd Reich, euthanasia
Type of object: painting
Link: https://360.grazmuseum.at/en/objects/selbstportraet-gra-16-12279/    https://collection.reinherit-hub.eu/#object=61     https://reinherit-hub.eu/exhibitions/identities/IdentitiesObjects/IdentitiesObjTwo/