White lekythoi were clay vessels used for the storage of aromatic oils. They first appeared at ca. 470 BC. and they were used exclusively for funerary purposes until 400 BC.  In this lekythos, a veiled female figure approaches a grave holding a basket filled with offerings. The scene is watched by a young man, probably the dead. 
Produced at an Attic Workshop, unknown maker

White lekythoi were clay vessels used for the storage of aromatic oils. They first appeared at ca. 470 BC. and they were used exclusively for funerary purposes until 400 BC. 
In this lekythos, a veiled female figure approaches a grave holding a basket filled with offerings. The scene is watched by a young man, probably the dead.
Lekythoi were produced in ceramic workshops located in the Kerameikos area, in Athens. In Attica, the soil was suitable (clay soil or clay) and a great amount of vessels of exceptional quality were constructed. For the potter to construct the lekythos, he first moulded the vessel on the wheel.The grip was constructed separately and later attached  to the vessel. Following that, the potter coated the surface of the vessel with a very fine slip of white clay (kaolin) as a base for the painter to design the iconography. Firing was the last stage of construction. 
Most contemporary ceramics are constructed on electric wheels and are decorated with glazed colours,  burned in the kiln, glazed and fired for a second time. Today there are contemporary potters that continue to observe ancient techniques and incorporate them into their practice.

The potter coated the surface of the vessel with a very fine slip of white clay (kaolin) as a base for the painter to design the iconography.
Today there are contemporary potters that continue to observe ancient techniques and incorporate them into their practice.

With little variation, pottery is an art which has survived from antiquity to today. It is considered an object of study for experimental archaeology. 

Date: around 420 BC 
Type of object: Pottery
Measurement: H. 28.8 cm
Maker: Unknown
Materials and techniques: Clay
Location: Museum of Cycladic Art
Link: https://cycladic.gr/en/exhibit/kp0102-leuki-likithos